---
layout: post
title:  "Did you know? eBPF virtual filesystem"
date:   2023-11-04
author: Quentin Monnet
employer: isovalent
excerpt: What is the eBPF virtual filesystem, and what do we use it for?
categories: BPF
tags: [BPF]
---

_This brief description of the eBPF virtual filesystem was initially published
in January 2021 by the Cilium community as part of the
[eBPF Updates #3](https://ebpf.io/blog/ebpf-updates-2021-01) on
[ebpf.io](https://ebpf.io/)._

eBPF objects, such as a program or a map, reside in kernel memory until they
are no longer needed. Internally, the kernel uses reference counters to keep
track of the number of “handles” pointing to such objects. When the number of
references comes down to zero, the program or the map is destroyed. The
references to a program would typically be a hook where the user has attached
the program (such as a tc filter or a kernel probe), or file descriptors that
were returned from the kernel when loading the program with the `bpf()` system
call. Similarly, references to an eBPF map can be held by eBPF programs using
the map or by a user program that retrieved a file descriptor.

As a consequence, if a process loaded an eBPF program without attaching it, the
program will be destroyed when the process exits and its file descriptors are
closed. There are ways to share file descriptors between processes, but to make
it easier to reference eBPF objects between user applications, or simply to
make them persistent at a time when they have no reference in the kernel (such
as a detached program or an unused map), another mechanism has been created:
the eBPF virtual filesystem.

The eBPF virtual (or _pseudo_) filesystem, often called bpffs, is traditionally
mounted at `/sys/fs/bpf`, but any alternative mount point can work. It is
possible to pin objects to this virtual filesystem, which is rendered as file
paths. Calling the `bpf()` system call with its `BPF_OBJ_PIN` subcommand pins
an object. Then, using the `BPF_OBJ_GET` subcommand on a bpffs path retrieves a
file descriptor to this pinned object. Removing a pinned path simply involves a
call to `unlink()`, just like for regular paths. Pinned paths (and the eBPF
objects they reference) are not persistent after reboot.

Note that the use of periods (`.`) in pinned paths is restricted. The glyph has
long been unused, but a recent feature introduced it to mark paths to specific
eBPF iterators that the system can preload, `maps.debug` and `progs.debug` (but
let's keep this for another time). You can have any other character allowed in
UNIX names. Yes, `/sys/fs/bpf/🐝` is a valid path.

Here is a concrete example. We create an eBPF map with bpftool. Because no
program uses the map yet, the only reference created is a file descriptor,
which is closed when bpftool exits. To avoid losing the map at this stage,
bpftool takes a path name and will use it to pin the map.

```
# bpftool map create /sys/fs/bpf/🍯 \
        type array key 4 value 32 entries 8 name honeypot
# bpftool --bpffs map show pinned /sys/fs/bpf/🍯
42: array  name foo  flags 0x0
        key 4B  value 32B  max_entries 8  memlock 4096B
        pinned /sys/fs/bpf/🍯
```

We can then reuse this map when loading a program:

```
# bpftool prog load bee.o /sys/fs/bpf/🐝 map name honeypot pinned /sys/fs/bpf/🍯
```

Of course, you do not _have to_ use emojis. More information on the virtual
eBPF filesystem is available (although somewhat scattered) in the
[_BPF and XDP Reference Guide_](https://docs.cilium.io/en/latest/bpf/#object-pinning).
A post called [_Lifetime of BPF objects_](https://facebookmicrosites.github.io/bpf/blog/2018/08/31/object-lifetime.html),
from Alexei Starovoitov, is an excellent resource to learn more about how eBPF
objects are managed in the kernel. More information on bpftool usage is
available from [the dedicated man pages](https://www.mankier.com/8/bpftool).

Note that there are a few other eBPF objects (BTF, links, iterators) and that
some of them are not handled exactly in the same manner. There are also other
ways to reference programs and maps, such as references in program array maps
or maps of maps.
